TOKYO — Business has never been better for Japanese anime. And that is exactly why Tetsuya Akutsu is thinking about calling it quits.

When Mr. Akutsu became an animator eight years ago, the global anime market — including TV shows, movies and merchandise — was a little more than half of what it would be by 2019, when it hit an estimated $24 billion. The pandemic boom in video streaming has further accelerated demand at home and abroad, as people binge-watch kid-friendly fare like “Pokémon” and cyberpunk extravaganzas like “Ghost in the Shell.”

But little of the windfall has reached Mr. Akutsu. Though working nearly every waking hour, he takes home just $1,400 to $3,800 a month as a top animator and an occasional director on some of Japan’s most popular anime franchises.

And he is one of the lucky ones: Thousands of lower-rung illustrators do grueling piecework for as little as $200 a month. Rather than rewarding them, the industry’s explosive growth has only widened the gap between the profits they help generate and their paltry wages, leaving many to wonder whether they can afford to continue following their passion.

“I want to work in the anime industry for the rest of my life,” Mr. Akutsu, 29, said during a telephone interview. But as he prepares to start a family, he feels intense financial pressure to leave. “I know it’s impossible to get married and to raise a child.”

The low wages and abysmal working conditions — hospitalization from overwork can be a badge of honor in Japan — have confounded the usual laws of the business world. Normally, surging demand would, at least in theory, spur competition for talent, driving up pay for existing workers and attracting new ones.

That’s happening to some extent at the business’s highest levels. Median annual earnings for key illustrators and other top-line talent increased to about $36,000 in 2019 from around $29,000 in 2015, according to statistics gathered by the Japan Animation Creators Association, a labor organization.

These animators are known in Japanese as “genga-man,” the term for those who draw what are called key frames. As one of them, Mr. Akutsu, a freelancer who bounces around Japan’s many animation studios, earns enough to eat and to rent a postage stamp of a studio apartment in a Tokyo suburb.
Editors’ Picks
But I’m All Grown Up With a Job of My Own
Flying With Dogs or Cats? These Are Airlines’ Pet Policies
36 Hours in Toronto

But his wages are a far cry from what animators earn in the United States, where average pay can be $65,000 a year or more, and more advanced work pays around $75,000.
Image
Tetsuya Akutsu, a freelance animator, wants to start a family, but on his wages, he said, “it’s impossible to get married and to raise a child.”Credit...Noriko Hayashi for The New York Times

And it wasn’t so long ago that Mr. Akutsu, who declined to comment on the specific pay practices of studios he had worked for, was toiling as a “douga-man,” the entry-level animators who do the frame-by-frame work that transforms a genga man’s illustrations into illusions of seamless motion. These workers earned an average of $12,000 in 2019, the animation association found, though it cautioned that this figure was based on a limited sample that did not include many of the freelancers who are paid even less.
More on Japan

    A High-Tech Transformation: TSMC, Taiwan’s semiconductor giant, is quickly remaking a farm town in Japan into Asia’s next hub of chip manufacturing with enormous support from the Japanese government.
    A Belated ‘Oppenheimer’ Opening: While some viewers lamented the movie’s exclusion of scenes from Hiroshima or Nagasaki, others said they recognized that it had another story to tell.
    Interest Rates Hike: Amid clues that the economy may be on a course for more sustained growth after years of stagnation, the country’s central bank raised interest rates for the first time since 2007.
    A Festival of Fire and Spirits: During Setsubun celebrations in Kyoto, demons and bad luck are banished as people prepare for the start of the new year.

The problem stems partly from the structure of the industry, which constricts the flow of profits to studios. But studios can get away with the meager pay in part because there is a nearly limitless pool of young people passionate about anime and dreaming of making a name in the industry, said Simona Stanzani, who has worked in the business as a translator for nearly three decades.

“There are a lot of artists out there who are amazing,” she said, adding that studios “have a lot of cannon fodder — they have no reason to raise wages.”

Vast wealth has flooded the anime market in recent years. Chinese production companies have paid Japanese studios large premiums to produce films for its domestic market. And in December, Sony — whose entertainment division has fallen badly behind in the race to put content online — paid nearly $1.2 billion to buy the anime video site Crunchyroll from AT&T.

Business is so good that nearly every animation studio in Japan is booked solid years in advance. Netflix said the number of households that watched anime on its streaming service in 2020 increased by half over the previous year.

But many studios have been shut out of the bonanza by an outmoded production system that directs nearly all of the industry’s profits to so-called production committees.

These committees are ad hoc coalitions of toy manufacturers, comic book publishers and other companies that are created to finance each project. They typically pay animation studios a set fee and reserve royalties for themselves.

While the system protects the studios from the risk of a flop, it also cuts them out of the windfalls created by hits.

Rather than negotiate higher rates or profit-sharing with the production committees, many studios have continued to squeeze animators, lowering costs by hiring them as freelancers. As a result, production costs for shows, which have long been well below those for projects in the United States, have remained low even as profits rise.

Studios are typically run by “creatives who want to make something really good,” and “they’ll try to bite off way too much and be way too ambitious,” said Justin Sevakis, the founder of Anime News Network and chief executive of MediaOCD, a company that produces anime for release in the United States.

“By the time they’re done, they have very possibly lost money on the project,” he said. “Everyone knows it’s a problem, but unfortunately it’s so systemic that no one really knows what to do about it.”

The same is true of the punishing nature of the work. Even in a country with a sometimes fatal devotion to the office, the anime industry is notorious for its brutal demands on employees, and animators speak with a perverse sense of pride about such acts of devotion as sleeping at their studios for weeks on end to complete a project.

In the first episode of “Shirobako,” an anime about young people’s efforts to break into the industry, an illustrator collapses with a fever as a deadline looms. The cliffhanger ending hinges not on her health but on whether the show she is drawing will be finished in time to air.

Jun Sugawara, a computer animator and activist who runs a nonprofit that provides young illustrators with affordable housing, began campaigning on their behalf in 2011 after learning about the penurious conditions endured by workers creating his favorite anime.

Animators’ long hours appear to violate Japanese labor regulations, he said, but the authorities have taken little interest, even though the government has made anime a central part of its public diplomacy efforts through its Cool Japan program.

“So far, the national and local governments don’t have any effective strategies” for dealing with the issue, Mr. Sugawara said. He added that “Cool Japan is a meaningless and irrelevant policy.”